First steps
===========

Ferenda can be used in a project-like manner with a command-line tool
(similar to how projects based on `Django
<https://www.djangoproject.com/>`_, `Sphinx <http://sphinx-doc.org/>`_
and `Scrapy <http://scrapy.org>`_ are used), or it can be used
programatically through a simple API. In this guide, we'll primarily
be using the command-line tool, and then show how to achieve the same
thing using the API.

The first step is to create a project. Lets make a simple website that
contains published standards from W3C and IETF, called
"netstandards". Ferenda installs a system-wide command-line tool
called ``ferenda-setup`` whose sole purpose is to create projects:

.. literalinclude:: examples/firststeps.sh
  :start-after: # begin setup
  :end-before: # end setup


The three files created by ``ferenda-setup`` is another command line
tool (``ferenda-build.py``) used for management of the newly created
project, a WSGI application (``wsgi.py``, see :doc:`wsgi`) and a
configuration file (``ferenda.ini``). The default configuration file
specifies most, but not all, of the available configuration
parameters. See :ref:`configuration` for a full list of the standard
configuration parameters.

.. note::

   When using the API, you don't create a project or deal with
   configuration files in the same way. Instead, your client code is
   responsible for keeping track of which docrepos to use, and
   providing configuration when calling their methods.

Creating a Document repository class
------------------------------------

Any document collection is handled by a
:ref:`keyconcept-documentrepository` class (or *docrepo* for
short), so our first task is to create a docrepo for W3C standards.

A docrepo class is responsible for downloading documents in a specific
document collection. These classes can inherit from
:class:`~ferenda.DocumentRepository`, which amongst others provides
the method :meth:`~ferenda.DocumentRepository.download` for
this. Since the details of how documents are made available on the web
differ greatly from collection to collection, you'll often have to
override the default implementation, but in this particular case, it
suffices. The default implementation assumes that all documents are
available from a single index page, and that the URLs of the documents
follow a set pattern.

The W3C standards are set up just like that: All standards are
available at ``http://www.w3.org/TR/tr-status-all``. There are a lot
of links to documents on that page, and not all of them are links to
recommended standards. A simple way to find only the recommended
standards is to see if the link follows the pattern
``http://www.w3.org/TR/<year>/REC-<standardid>-<date>``.

Creating a docrepo that is able to download all web
standards is then as simple as creating a subclass and setting three
class properties. Create this class in the current directory (or
anywhere else on your python path) and save it as ``w3cstandards.py``

.. literalinclude:: examples/w3cstandards.py
  :start-after: # begin basic-properties
  :end-before: # end basic-properties
  
The first property, :data:`~ferenda.DocumentRepository.alias`, is
required for all docrepos and controls the alias used by the command
line tool for that docrepo, as well as the path where files are
stored, amongst other things. If your project has a large collection
of docrepos, it's important that they all have unique aliases.

The other two properties are parameters which the default
implementation of :meth:`~ferenda.DocumentRepository.download` uses in
order to find out which documents to
download. :data:`~ferenda.DocumentRepository.start_url` is just a
simple regular URL, while
:data:`~ferenda.DocumentRepository.document_url_regex` is a standard
:py:mod:`re` regex with named groups. The group named ``basefile`` has
special meaning, and will be used as a base for stored files and
elsewhere as a short identifier for the document. For example, the web
standard found at URL
http://www.w3.org/TR/2012/REC-rdf-plain-literal-20121211/ will have
the basefile ``rdf-plain-literal``.
      
Using ferenda-build.py and registering docrepo classes
------------------------------------------------------

Next step is to enable our class. Like most tasks, this is done using
the command line tool present in your project directory. To register
the class (together with a short alias) in your ``ferenda.ini``
configuration file, run the following:

.. literalinclude:: examples/firststeps.sh
  :start-after: # begin enable
  :end-before: # end enable

This creates a new section in ferenda.ini that just looks like the
following:

  [w3c]
  class = w3cstandards.W3CStandards
  
From this point on, you can use the class name or the alias "w3c"
interchangably:

.. literalinclude:: examples/firststeps.sh
  :start-after: # begin status-example
  :end-before: # end status-example

.. note:: 

   When using the API, there is no need (nor possibility) to register
   docrepo classes. Your client code directly instantiates the
   class(es) it uses and calls methods on them.

Downloading
-----------

To test the downloading capabilities of our class, you can run the
download method directly from the command line using the command line
tool:

.. literalinclude:: examples/firststeps.sh
  :start-after: # begin download
  :end-before: # end download

After a few minutes of downloading, the result is a bunch of files in
``data/w3c/downloaded``:

.. literalinclude:: examples/firststeps.sh
  :start-after: # begin list-downloaded
  :end-before: # end list-downloaded


.. note::

   The ``.etag`` files are created in order to support `Conditional
   GET <http://en.wikipedia.org/wiki/HTTP_ETag>`_, so that we don't
   waste our time or remote server bandwith by re-downloading
   documents that hasn't changed. They can be ignored and might go
   away in future versions of Ferenda.

We can get a overview of the status of our docrepo using the
``status`` command:

.. literalinclude:: examples/firststeps.sh
  :start-after: # begin status
  :end-before: # end status

.. note::

   To do the same using the API:

   .. literalinclude:: examples/firststeps-api.py
      :start-after: # begin download-status
      :end-before: # end download-status

Finally, if the logging information scrolls by too quickly and you
want to read it again, take a look in the ``data/logs`` directory.
Each invocation of ``ferenda-build.py`` creates a new log file
containing the same information that is written to stdout.


Parsing
-------

Let's try the next step in the workflow, to parse one of the documents
we've downloaded.

.. literalinclude:: examples/firststeps.sh
  :start-after: # begin parse
  :end-before: # end parse

By now, you might have realized that our command line tool generally
is called in the following manner::

  $ ./ferenda-build.py <docrepo> <command> [argument(s)]

The parse command resulted in one new file being created in
``data/w3c/parsed``.

.. literalinclude:: examples/firststeps.sh
   :start-after: # begin list-parsed
   :end-before: # end list-parsed

And we can again use the ``status`` command to get a comprehensive
overview of our document repository.

.. literalinclude:: examples/firststeps.sh
   :start-after: # begin status-2
   :end-before: # end status-2

Note that by default, subsequent invocations of parse won't actually
parse documents that don't need parsing.

.. literalinclude:: examples/firststeps.sh
   :start-after: # begin parse-again
   :end-before: # end parse-again
  
But during development, when you change the parsing code frequently,
you'll need to override this through the ``--force`` flag (or set the
``force`` parameter in ``ferenda.ini``).

.. literalinclude:: examples/firststeps.sh
   :start-after: # begin parse-force
   :end-before: # end parse-force

.. note::

   To do the same using the API:

   .. literalinclude:: examples/firststeps-api.py
      :start-after: # begin parse-force
      :end-before: # end parse-force

Note also that you can parse all downloaded documents through the
``--all`` flag, and control logging verbosity by the ``--loglevel``
flag.

.. literalinclude:: examples/firststeps.sh
  :start-after: # begin parse-all
  :end-before: # end parse-all

.. note::

   To do the same using the API:

   .. literalinclude:: examples/firststeps-api.py
      :start-after: # begin parse-all
      :end-before: # end parse-all

   Note that the API makes you explicitly list and iterate over any
   available files. This is so that client code has the opportunity to
   parallelize this work in an appropriate way.

If we take a look at the files created in ``data/w3c/distilled``, we
see some metadata for each document. This metadata has been
automatically extracted from RDFa statements in the XHTML documents,
but is so far very spartan.

Now take a look at the files created in ``data/w3c/parsed``. The
default implementation of ``parse()`` processes the DOM of the main
body of the document, but some tags and attribute that are used only
for formatting are stripped, such as ``<style>`` and ``<script>``.

These documents have quite a lot of "boilerplate" text such as table
of contents and links to latest and previous versions which we'd like
to remove so that just the actual text is left (problem 1). And we'd
like to explicitly extract some parts of the document and represent
these as metadata for the document -- for example the title, the
publication date, the authors/editors of the document and it's
abstract, if available (problem 2).

Just like the default implementation of
:meth:`~ferenda.DocumentRepository.download` allowed for some
customization using class variables, we can solve problem 1 by setting
two additional class variables:

.. literalinclude:: examples/w3cstandards.py
   :start-after: # begin parse-properties
   :end-before: # end parse-properties


The :py:data:`~ferenda.DocumentRepository.parse_content_selector`
member specifies, using `CSS selector syntax
<http://www.w3.org/TR/CSS2/selector.html>`_, the part of the document
which contains our main text. It defaults to ``"body"``, and can often
be set to ``".content"`` (the first element that has a class="content"
attribute"), ``"#main-text"`` (any element with the id
``"main-text"``), ``"article"`` (the first ``<article>`` element) or
similar.  The
:py:data:`~ferenda.DocumentRepository.parse_filter_selectors` is a
list of similar selectors, with the difference that all matching
elements are removed from the tree. In this case, we use it to remove
some boilerplate sections that often within the content specified by
:py:data:`~ferenda.DocumentRepository.parse_content_selector`, but
which we don't want to appear in the final result.

In order to solve problem 2, we can override one of the methods that
the default implementation of parse() calls:

.. literalinclude:: examples/w3cstandards.py
   :language: python
   :start-after: # begin metadata
   :end-before: # end metadata


:py:meth:`~ferenda.DocumentRepository.parse_metadata_from_soup` is
called with a document object and the parsed HTML document in the form
of a BeautifulSoup object. It is the responsibility of
:py:meth:`~ferenda.DocumentRepository.parse_metadata_from_soup` to add
document-level metadata for this document, such as it's title,
publication date, and similar. Note that
:py:meth:`~ferenda.DocumentRepository.parse_metadata_from_soup` is run
before the
:py:data:`~ferenda.DocumentRepository.parse_content_selector` and
:py:data:`~ferenda.DocumentRepository.parse_filter_selectors` are
applied, so the BeautifulSoup object passed into it contains the
entire document.

.. note::

   The selectors are passed to `BeautifulSoup.select() <http://www.crummy.com/software/BeautifulSoup/bs4/doc/#css-selectors>`_,
   which supports a subset of the CSS selector syntax. If you stick
   with simple tag, id and class-based selectors you should be fine.

Now, if you run ``parse --force`` again, both documents and metadata are
in better shape. Further down the line the value of properly extracted
metadata will become more obvious.

Republishing the parsed content
-------------------------------

The XHTML contains metadata in RDFa format. As such, you can extract
all that metadata and put it into a triple store. The relate command
does this, as well as creating a full text index of all textual
content:

.. literalinclude:: examples/firststeps.sh
   :start-after: # begin relate-all
   :end-before: # end relate-all

The next step is to create a number of *resource files* (placed under
``data/rsrc``). These resource files include css and javascript files
for the new website we're creating, as well as a xml configuration
file used by the XSLT transformation done by ``generate`` below:

.. literalinclude:: examples/firststeps.sh
   :start-after: # begin makeresources
   :end-before: # end makeresources

.. note::

   It is possible to combine and minify both javascript and css files
   using the ``combineresources`` option in the configuration file.

Running ``makeresources`` is needed for the final few steps.

.. literalinclude:: examples/firststeps.sh
   :start-after: # begin generate-all
   :end-before: # end generate-all

The ``generate`` command creates browser-ready HTML5 documents from
our structured XHTML documents, using our site's navigation.

.. literalinclude:: examples/firststeps.sh
   :start-after: # begin final-commands
   :end-before: # end final-commands

The ``toc`` and ``feeds`` commands creates static files for general
indexes/tables of contents of all documents in our docrepo as well as
Atom feeds, and the ``frontpage`` command creates a suitable frontpage
for the site as a whole.

.. note:: 

   To do all of the above using the API:

   .. literalinclude:: examples/firststeps-api.py
      :start-after: # begin final-commands
      :end-before: # end final-commands

Finally, to start a development web server and check out the finished
result::

  $ ./ferenda-build.py w3c runserver
  $ open http://localhost:8080/

Now you've created your own web site with structured documents. It
contains listings of all documents, feeds with updated documents (in
both HTML and Atom flavors) and full text search. In order to deploy
your site, you can run it under Apache+mod_wsgi, ngnix+uWSGI, Gunicorn
or just about any WSGI capable web server, see :doc:`wsgi`.

.. note::

   Using :py:func:`~ferenda.manager.runserver` from the API does not
   really make any sense.  If your environment supports running WSGI
   applications, see the above link for information about how to get
   the ferenda WSGI application. Otherwise, the app can be run by any
   standard WSGI host.

To keep it up-to-date whenever the W3C issues new standards, use the
following command:

.. literalinclude:: examples/firststeps.sh
   :start-after: # begin all
   :end-before: # end all

The "all" command is an alias that runs ``download``, ``parse --all``,
``relate --all``, ``generate --all``, ``toc`` and ``feeds`` in
sequence.

.. note::

   The API doesn't have any corresponding method. Just run all of the
   above code again. As long as you don't pass the ``force=True``
   parameter when creating the docrepo instance, ferendas dependency
   management should make sure that documents aren't needlessly
   re-parsed etc.

This 20-line example of a docrepo took a lot of shortcuts by depending
on the default implementation of the
:meth:`~ferenda.DocumentRepository.download` and
:meth:`~ferenda.DocumentRepository.parse` methods. Ferenda tries to
make it really to get *something* up and running quickly, and then
improving each step incrementally.

In the next section :doc:`createdocrepos` we will take a closer look
at each of the six main steps (``download``, ``parse``, ``relate``,
``generate``, ``toc`` and ``news``), including how to completely
replace the built-in methods.  You can also take a look at the source
code for :py:class:`ferenda.sources.tech.W3Standards`, which contains a more
complete (and substantially longer) implementation of
:meth:`~ferenda.DocumentRepository.download`,
:meth:`~ferenda.DocumentRepository.parse` and the others.
